In this section, I'd like to speculate about
the further future. I'm sure everybody's heard
of Moore's law. It was articulated by Gordon
Moore of Intel in 1971. He was looking at
the number of transistors that they could
put on a silicon chip and he was plotting
how that number of transistors per chip increased
over time.
And he showed in the very early days of silicon
chip technology that the transistor count
doubled every two years. In the four decades
since then, that trend has continued and this
graph shows a line fitted to the transistor
density of a number of micro-processes that
have been developed over that period of time.
So Moore's law is all about the number of
transistors per chip.
This is an interesting graph from Ray Kurzweil.
And what he's plotted here is the number of
calculations per second that you can get for
a thousand dollars. And he's plotted that
against time. And this curve is interesting
because it's not linear. In fact, it's exponential.
And what Ray has done is taken a number of
data points and plotted them and fitted in
exponential to that. Now, what's really interesting
about this graph are the horizontal dashed
lines which correspond to the computational
capability of various life forms.
So he has a horizontal line for an insect
brain, a mouse brain, a human brain, and all
human brains. Right now, we're about here.
And if this graph is correct, it indicates
that for a thousand dollars, I could buy the
computational equivalent of one mouse brain.
By they year 2030, I should be able to buy
a computer for $1000 equivalent to a human
brain. The most interesting of all is it by
the year 2050, for a thousand dollars, I can
buy the computational equivalent of all human
brains on the planet.
The year 2050 is not that far away. For many
of you, it will be within your working life.
So there will be profound implications if
we can have this much computational power
available for so few dollars.
This graph plots the power density of various
microprocessors against their clock frequency.
And we can see that over time, we're moving
in this direction, we are moving towards higher
and higher power densities and higher and
higher clock frequencies.
Down here, we can see the human brain. We
see that it has an impressively low power
density and it operates at a very, very low
clock frequency. We can argue that where we're
going with silicon computational technology,
we're going in the wrong direction. We're
going further and further away from the amazing
capability of the human brain.
Now it's possible to simulate human brain
on a supercomputer. Apparently, these simulations
run at something like 1/500 of real time.
And if we were to scale those up so that they
would operate in real time, the computer would
be big and require like 12 gigawatts of electricity.
You can power New York with that much electricity.
So clearly, if we're trying to get human-like
intelligence in robots, following these traditional
approach is going to require computers that
are massive, expensive, and consume phenomenal
amounts of electricity. What can we do to
get around that?
Well, some people are looking at different
computing architectures, called: neuromorphic
computing, modelled on the neuro connectionist
structure of human brains. So these are like
neural networks on steroids and embedded in
custom silicon chips. So perhaps, this is
the future hardware in which we will create
the intelligence that will power future robots.
Following on from this biological approach
to computation, learning from nature about
the way brains do computation is to consider
the perhaps most important biological sensing
invention which is vision.
Vision is an amazing sense shared by almost
all creatures on the planet. The sense of
vision has evolved multiple times independently
and in parallel. And today, there is a vast
variety of different sorts of eyes on creatures
on the planet.
Here we see just a few of them. We see the
pinhole camera eye of a nautilus, the multiple
eyes of spider, the compound eyes of an insect,
the eyes of a bird, the small reflector-based
eyes of a scallop, the eyes of an octopus.
Eyes are everywhere. They are really important
sensing modality for all living creatures
and I believe very strongly it is an important
sensing modality for robots.
So if you're interested in vision, the sense
of vision, and how robots might exploit that,
then I invite you to join me in the follow
up MOOC, Robotic Vision, which is coming soon.
So what are the important take-home messages
from this six weeks that we've been looking
at robots? I think the first message I like
you to take home is that robots are real.
They're not all like the fictional robots
that you read about in books or you see in
television and in movie theatres. There are real robots out there doing useful things on the planet today.
These robots are diverse in form and function.
They don't look like the humanoid robots we
see in fiction. They might look like cars,
they might look like tractors or airplanes
or submarines, but they are robots because
they follow this fundamental paradigm of sensing,
planning, and acting so that they can achieve
a goal. That's what robots are.
The functionality of robots is improving incredibly
rapidly and that's driven by improvements
in technology, computational technology, and
the ready availability of amazing sensors;
inertial sensors, visual sensors, and so on.
But there are some really important non-technical
take-home messages here. And in this lecture,
we’ve talked a lot about the big challenges
that confront all of us as a society and these
are problems around population and food and
jobs and care for the elderly.
These are massive challenges that our societies
face and I really believe that robots are
part of the solution to these challenges.
But as a roboticist’s I believe it's important
that we think much more widely about the implications
of the technology that we are developing.
Yes, I believe robotics really is the answer
to many of these challenges but we do need
to be aware of the way the technology will
be used. We need to understand about the ethics,
we need to understand about the sorts of concerns
and considerations that general members of
the public hold. So it's our responsibility, as roboticist’s to employ and deploy this technology wisely.
All right, that is the end of the MOOC, it's
the end of the first MOOC that I have ever
done. It's the end of Introduction to Robotics.
If you're interested in Robotic Vision, then
please join me soon for the sequel, the Robotic
Vision MOOC, which should be coming your way
sometime soon.
I hope that you've learned a lot in the MOOC
and I hope you've had some fun along the way
with the learning. And if you did the project,
I hope you learned a lot by getting your hands
dirty and building a machine that does something
useful and does something functional, your
first steps into robotics.
It's a fascinating field. It's a field that's
going to go very far and very fast so you're
on the on-ramp to a future in robotics.
I've had a lot of fun doing the MOOC but it's
been an enormous amount of work. It's taken
about two years of my life to produce these
two MOOCs and I couldn't have done it without
the help of an awful lot of people.
These a very passionate, committed, and enthusiastic
people who in behind the scenes helping me
to take the raw ideas from my head and deploy
it with wonderful graphics and wonderful videos
so as to give you a sort of more enjoyable
learning experience. So, I'm very grateful
to all of those people.
Anyway, for now, thank you very much for participating
in the course. I hope you enjoyed it.
Thanks, and bye.